This week on the podcast, wow, this is
another banger. Strap yourself in. Mike
Pile, deputy head of Black Rock's
portfolio management group. They oversee
about $5 trillion in client assets. Not
only is it systematic and discretionary
investment strategies, but he also
oversees the Black Rockck Investment
Institute as well as their hedge funds.
You may not know Black Rockck globally
is one of the top 10 uh hedge fund uh
over portfolio managers. um about $94
billion.
Uh one little note, we're recording this
on Tuesday, April 7th. Supposedly
something is happening tonight at 8:00.
You'll know what happened by the time
you hear this. We won't. We don't know
if something terrible is happening or if
it's another Taco Tuesday, but we'll
find out soon enough. In the meantime,
with no further ado, my conversation
with Mike Pile, deputy head of Black
Rockck's portfolio management group.
Mike Pile, welcome to Bloomberg. Before
we get into both your market and
government experience, let let's take a
look at your background. You graduate
Sumaumlau in economics from Dartmouth.
you get a JD from Yale and then uh a
master's an LLM from Cambridge. What was
the original career plan?
>> So, I maybe go back before higher
education. Um, you know, I'm from a
little town in the Midwest, 600 people
in the middle of Illinois. Um, no stop
whites in the the little town where I
grew up. And um you know I had a sense
from a pretty early age that um I wanted
to do something out beyond uh the
horizon uh out past the fields. And you
know, I was lucky enough when I was in
high school, uh, there was this
competition sponsored by the local
community college called Running the US
Economy, uh, where you could set
monetary policy, you'd set government
spending levels, you'd set taxation
rates, basically the big tools of
monetary and fiscal policy. And over a
10-year period, you'd set those
variables, and you'd see what came out
the other side in terms of GDP growth,
in terms of unemployment, in terms of
the stock market. And for me, I had
never really um grappled with a more
interesting set of problems than that
when I was 14, 15, 16 years old. And I,
you know, didn't really have the words
to express what it is that would take me
to. But I knew that problems at the
heart of economic policy, what that
meant for ordinary people, what that
meant for markets were the most
fascinating things I'd ever encountered
and how I wanted to spend my career.
>> Huh. and and how you spent your career
is moving back and forth between
government and the private sector. You
have two long stints at Black Rockck,
including the current current one. You
were in the Obama administration, you
were in the Biden administration. How do
you shift back and forth between these
two worlds? And how does working in
government affect how you perceive
investing, risk, policy from the private
side?
>> Yeah. So, I'd say I I try to view um my
time in government and my time as an
investor and a black rockck as really
two sides of of of the same coin. Uh you
know, the job in government, at least as
I understood it, was to whether through
economic policy or national security
policy had the pleasure to to work on
both of those through the years. you
know, provide a predictable, stable uh
foundation uh for prosperity for the US
and and and hopefully the world beyond
and recognize that the job in government
is to provide that stable foundation so
businesses, so families, so individuals
can, you know, live their lives, make
their choices economically, can take
risks uh in the economy to build
businesses, expand businesses, invest
and grow. uh knowing that there's some
basic stability and predictability that
they get from government. And so for me,
like I said, you know, that that time in
government was one side of that coin.
That time as an investor is the other
side of that coin. How do you try to
take that that output from from policy
makers and make sense of the world, make
sense of the economy, make sense of
markets, and then make sound choices for
for clients? We
>> we're going to talk a little later about
the state of uh government policy. I
want to just stick with your your
background before we get into the
nitty-gritty. So, you were at the
Treasury and the White House from 2009
to 2013, really the the midst of the
great financial crisis recovery. Uh tell
us about that experience. What was that
like?
>> So, it's a pretty extraordinary thing uh
to be a part of. uh had a chance to
learn from be seasoned by you know a set
of extraordinary in in my judgment um
policy makers whether that was Secretary
Gener Briner, Peter Orz, Jason Ferman,
others uh folks that early in my career,
you know, I just learned a lot um about
what it meant to make sound policy
choices, consider policy choices in the
midst of crisis. You know, I think one
of the things I also took away from that
uh experience is this recognition that
um you know, there's there's kind of
there's no other room. Uh that you know
these are uh very accomplished policy
makers making choices with imperfect
information,
>> with not enough time, with incredibly
high stakes. And there's no other room
where the hyperconfident people who know
everything and have the luxury of time
are. There's just the human beings
sitting in front of you and and you've
got to do your role to support them in
the way you can. And you know for me
that was a very you know empowering
experience a recognition that from an
early stage in my career I needed to
take responsibility. I needed to offer
my best day in and day out because like
I said, there's no other room with the
hyper competent people. There's just the
role you get to play with people acting
with not enough time and not enough
information to make high consequence
judgments.
>> So, so let's talk about those judgments.
What do you think policymakers got right
and and what was the biggest mistake?
What did we get wrong as a nation?
So I mean I think that the um I think
one of the principal lessons coming out
of the global financial crisis uh is
that um in the face of a large economic
shock, a shock that impacts the balance
sheets of households and businesses, uh
the government needs to act speedily and
with size uh to prevent uh the labor
market damage, the economic damage from
being an overhang that lasts for a long
time. And I think one of the things that
a lot of policy makers concluded uh
coming out of the GFC is we just didn't
do enough quickly enough. And as a
result, we had a very slow recovery, you
know, that didn't last just a couple
years, but 10, 12 years, uh, and had
labor market damage that lasted for
longer than it needed to because we
didn't ask with the force and speed that
we needed to.
>> So, so when you say we didn't do enough,
uh, the Fed was at zero. Every type of
credit um alphabet soup of of
organizational government um entities
came into effect. Are you referring to
the fiscal side? Because it felt like
the fiscal stimulus was very very
modest. Uh about a third was temporary
tax cuts, a third was temporary
extension of unemployment. Uh shovel
ready stuff was 100 $180 billion. It
almost seems like we overcompensated in
the start of the pandemic and and went
huge to make up for that. But I'm
assuming you're talking about a a very
underfunded fiscal stimulus.
>> I think that's principally yes. You know
what I mean? I mean I think one thing I
would you know highlight here um is in
some ways um the United States only got
out of the doldrums post the the GFC
during the first Trump administration.
and you know, President Trump and and
that um that Republican Congress passed
the the 2020 2017 uh tax bills. Now,
coming from where I come from, I I
wouldn't necessarily have signed off on
every particular of that bill, but I
think what you saw was fiscal stimulus
at size going through the economy as a
result of those uh as a result of that
tax bill and as a result an economy that
at long last began to see full
employment, began to see that higher
velocity, began to see uh really the US
get out of those post GFC doldrums.
Again, not how I would have necessarily
designed the fiscal stimulus myself, but
I think the fact that that's really
perhaps the moment when we came out of
the D doldrums highlights that that
fiscal lever was one that perhaps we put
should have pulled sooner and at greater
size earlier uh post the the crisis.
>> Really interesting. So So let's talk
about um some of your other roles within
government. Um you were a law clerk for
Merrick Garland. That that's
fascinating. tell us about that
experience.
>> Uh yes, so Judge Garland was my very uh
first boss uh in Washington. Um you
know, in some ways, um the perfect way
to begin a career, uh somebody that I
continue to regard as as as the model uh
public servant. I I say, listen, I
learned uh three things from the judge.
Uh I learned what it meant to love the
law. I learned that I didn't love the
law the way the judge did. And that
three, I needed to find something that
that I loved as much as Judge Garland uh
loved uh being a lawyer, being a judge.
Uh and so that brought me back to what
I'd done I was talking about a moment
ago in high school uh when you know I
really fell in love with uh economics,
economic policy, the impact on uh people
and and markets, what I'd studied as an
undergrad and and in graduate school.
And so what I really took away from that
experience is I wanted there to be a
strong public service component to what
I did and also that I needed to put
myself to work in a space that that I
really loved and felt passion for. And
that was the space of of economics,
domestic economic policy, international
economic policy and working to make, you
know, the US and the world a more
prosperous place. So you were the
president's personal envoy to groups
like the G7, the G20, Apex summits. when
when you look around the world and see
um USChina relations, the Russia's war
in the Ukraine, uh Israel and America's
war with Iran, uh AI and just energy
security, trade and investment, tariffs,
all these things. It seems like it's
just an overwhelming amount of things
taking place. How effective are are
these global organizations? what do they
actually accomplish? It it just seems
like the fire hose is so overwhelming
it's impossible to know where to even
begin.
>> Yeah. So, you know, I worked for two
years as as President Biden's deputy
national security adviser. I think
President Biden um started from the
place of believing that, you know, the
United States uh acts with greatest
impact in the world when it acts
alongside our closest allies and
partners. And I think that's part of the
reason why the G7 uh during uh the years
I was serving uh was perhaps at the
height of its of its impact and
influence uh across time. I mean, I
think of two things that that really
highlight this. you know, one uh was
after uh Russia's invasion of Ukraine uh
really acting with force, with one
voice, not just as the United States,
but as a set of allies, uh to put a
historic uh set of sanctions on Russia,
to put a historic economic pressure on
Russia, uh and to do that in a way that
uh made sure that it wasn't just the
United States acting, uh but all of our
allies and partners together around the
world acting in sponsor delivering a
stronger uh force of policy than the
United States for all of its uh power
and might could have delivered by
itself. Similarly, I think with respect
to, you know, a kind of different type
of problem, um, you know, thinking
about, uh, our the United States
competition with China like in domains,
uh, such as technology and and
artificial intelligence, the type of
thing that's very front of mind today.
You know, a lot of our um, European uh,
allies came to that with with more
skepticism. They have a different
perspective on their relations with
China than you know we had than the
United States had both across frankly
the Trump administration and the B
administration. And it was, you know,
the hard diplomatic work day in day out,
week in week out, you know, persuading
skeptical allies uh to join us in some
of the policy steps that we thought were
important to protect our technologies,
to protect the national security
applications that they offered to
protect our economic well-being against
that uh competitive uh threat and
bringing those allies along through,
like I said, the hard work of diplomacy.
through the hard work of persuasion day
in day out week in week out I think was
ultimately quite fruitful and you know
something that was an important part of
how I spent those years.
>> So so given all that policy experience
and being in the room where it happens
um how does that affect how you look at
markets and investing
did did your government experience
affect how you think about risk
uncertainty and and various
opportunities?
>> Yeah. So I mean I I would say a couple
things there. Um
you know one you know I do think that um
investing and policym are different
exercises and need to be kept separate.
Um policym is an exercise of attempting
to make a world as you want it to be or
at least as the people's elected
representatives uh want it to be. Um
investing is an exercise of taking the
world as it is uh and making sound
judgments about uh how to uh invest uh
client capital that is their capital
that is their savings on their behalf uh
so as to help them achieve what they've
set out to achieve. Um and so to me the
the framework I've used to to think
about um investing is you know kind of
comes back to some of the blocking and
tackling of of of active management. I
think about you know my my mentor at
Black Rockck Ron Khan uh one of the
authors of the literally the Bible of of
quantitative investing and the
fundamental law of active management.
You know it's really all about um making
forecasts that are right about the
world. uh having a wide set of those
forecasts so you can build a diversified
portfolio and then translating those
insights efficiently into portfolios
through the assets you own. So again for
me these these these these these
exercises overlap to some degree but I
really try to keep them distinct because
one's about the world as you might hope
it to be and the other is about the
world as it is and being sure that you
don't confuse those two things is really
part and parcel of what it means I think
to do you know the job you're meant to
do at each M I like that. I like that
framework between the two. So let's talk
a little bit uh about the portfolio
management group. Tell us about the
various strategies you oversee. What is
the deputy head of PMG actually do?
>> Yeah, so the portfolio management group
uh as you you talked about is really the
organization within BlackRock that
oversees our active investing strategies
uh in public markets. um you know been
entrusted with um over just about$5
trillion dollars in in client assets to
manage uh through those strategies but
but really spans asset classes fixed
income equities multi-assets spans
styles as you say both discretionary and
systematic um spans both long only as
well as long short hedge fund and liquid
alternative strategies so really it's
it's it's that full umbrella of active
strategies in in public markets you know
in terms of what do I do um well I I
directly oversee what we do on on the
hedge funds and liquid alternative side
uh directly oversee our efforts in
fundamental equities and and directly
oversee our internal think tank the
Black Rockck Investment Institute but
what does that mean you know day-to-day
you know I'd say it's it's a mix you
know with some share of my time uh I am
working with our portfolio managers
working with our lead researchers to try
to offer what I can uh to help them
frame what's happening in the world to
help them, as we talked about,
understand the world as it is and what
that might mean for markets, uh, and
help them, uh, think about the choices
they're making in portfolios on behalf
of clients. But, you know, really the
lion share of my time is about making
sure, you know, we've got the right
portfolio managers and teams, the right
strategies, the right investment process
and research process sitting beneath
those teams uh, so that we can, you
know, deliver for clients. In a lot of
respects, it's, you know, about a lot
more about being the GM or the coach,
uh, than being, uh, the player. Uh, and
I think that's a, it's a, it's a pretty
exciting mix of things, uh, that I get
to do as a result.
>> So, I think everybody understands what
hedge funds are. What are liquid
alternatives? Explain that a little bit.
>> Yeah, sure. So maybe to to take a take a
step back, you know, if I think about
the challenge that investors face today,
uh, and this is true whether we're
talking about the most sophisticated
uh, large asset owners on the planet or,
you know, momand pop uh, investors
saving for their retirement. It's where
can they find diversification? you know
a a obviously one of the the core
precepts of of investing is the free
lunch of diversification the value of
diversification and yet uh it is
increasingly hard to find out there and
I think that's true in a couple of ways
you know one you know traditionally we
think about uh government bonds being an
important hedge against stocks in a
portfolio when stocks go down bonds go
up in value you know that's not what we
saw in 2022 that's not what we saw uh in
March of of this year. And so finding
tools that can help diversify portfolios
in a world where bonds aren't perhaps
serving that role as well as they have
at different points in history. And
secondly, on the equity side, you know,
facing markets that are increasingly
concentrated, you know, we see what a
large share of indices, you know, those
big mega mega cap tech names are today.
That means that when you own the index,
you're owning a less diversified equity
portfolio than has historically been the
case. So what does that mean about where
liquid alternatives step in? You know, I
think one of the ways in which uh
investors can find diversification is by
having exposures that are neutral to
broad markets, uh neutral to those betas
and and stocks and and bonds that drive
the lion share of portfolios. And and
being neutral to the markets uh means
having strategies that can be long and
short uh in an asset class that can be
long individual stocks can be short uh
individual stocks the same on the bond
side in order to generate alpha and
investment return that is independent of
the movements in the broad markets.
liquid alternatives uh are are vehicles
that that uh have exactly those types of
strategies. They're very similar in this
respect to the types of strategies that
we deploy in our direct uh hedge funds
uh and offer, you know, similar types of
uncorrelated return. Now, an important
difference between something like a
direct hedge fund and a liquid
alternative, you know, these are
different types of vehicles meant for
different types of investors. uh they
offer daily liquidity uh as opposed to
hedge funds which have different
liquidity terms. That means, you know,
running strategies that at their core
are the same across liquid alts and
hedge funds, but are uh designed to be
uh in daily liquid vehicles that are
designed to be uh run with uh much less
leverage to recognize the types of
clients and the types of needs that
those clients have which are for greater
diversification but also liquidity,
transparency, availability that is
different from an institutional hedge
fund uh clientele. So, so from your
seat, what sort of trends are you
observing either in hedge funds or
liquid alts? What what kind of
strategies are resonating with
investors?
>> Yeah, so I I think that exactly as we
were talking about what's resonating is
um the availability of diversification
of diversifying the diversifiers
>> meaning beyond just 6040 just beyond
just stocks and bonds.
>> Exactly. Um and I think you know some
work that my colleagues the Black Rockck
Investment Institute did you know
highlighted the type of world that we're
investing in now and and they basically
made the point which goes to why we
don't see the diversification across
stocks and bonds we have historically
that you know some of the macroeconomic
and the macro underpinnings of markets
uh have become unmed uh in recent years.
that is a less predictable framework
whether it's around uh trends on growth
of inflation trends around monetary and
fiscal policy frameworks the
geopolitical environment and the like
and as a result uh hedge funds and
liquid alternative strategies provide
tools that allow managers to navigate
that environment either you know like
with my colleagues on the systematic
side you know running strategies that
are not just market neutral but but
neutral to broad market factors like
momentum, like low volatility, like some
of these other kind of well-known factor
exposures and really focusing on, you
know, true uncorrelated alpha and also
macroeconomic strategies, macro
strategies where skilled managers are
navigating a much more complicated macro
macronomic environment to deliver alpha
through that skillful navigation. Those
from our research are the two types of
strategies that are perhaps best poised
to offer that different type of return,
that different type of diversification.
And that's what we're seeing not just
within the firm but across the industry,
the places that are attracting client
interest are systematic strategies are
macro strategies and we think precisely
because they best correspond to the
opportunity set that markets are
offering us.
>> So, so let's talk a little bit about
that systematic approach. you that team
began in 1985 with a grand total of
three investment signals. You used more
than a thousand investment signals. I'm
kind of fascinated. This came along with
the BGI acquisition in '09, which
everybody remembers for Eyesshares, but
this is still almost $400 billion. This
is a substantial chunk of capital. tell
us a little bit about how the systematic
team thinks about adding a signal, how
they integrate all these various
signals. Um, and uh I'm legally
obligated to ask how is AI contributing
uh to these signals?
>> Yeah, I mean, so I' I'd say a couple
things. I mean, one, you know, this is a
team that really is at the forefront of
pulling in uh a bunch, you know, taking
advantage of the fact that the
availability of data in the world,
structured data, unstructured data, you
know, is stepwise different than it has
been ever before in history. And the
techniques available to analyze,
process, identify um consistent valuable
uh investment signals from that data is
also given expanded compute, given uh
the changes in techniques including
around uh generative and agentic AI, you
know, to make sense of that data and and
bring order to it. you know, this is,
you know, really at the heart of what
our our systematic researchers uh do in
building uh signals and portfolios. I'd
sort of add a couple of additional
points. I mean, one building on what you
said, they've been at this for now 41
years. Uh so, you know, they are they
are not new to um uh to using data,
using tools of AI, machine learning to
generate, you know, alpha for clients.
This is something they've been at uh
really defining the frontier for four
decades. You know, they were doing
natural language processing more than 10
years ago. They were doing portfolio
optimization with machine learning more
than 10 years ago. This is not a Johnny
come lately story of the moment. This is
a story of a crude excellence and
expertise built over decades. The other
thing I'd say and maybe it's funny to
talk about it with respect to a to a
quant team to a you know a kind of
hardcore systematic team but I think one
of the things that really sets it apart
you know within black rockck within the
industry is you know the culture uh that
they've built. Uh this is you know a
core set of investors and researchers
that as you say have been together for
decades that have been together in many
cases since before uh BGI became a part
of Black Rockck became Black Rockck
systematic. Um, and so there's that kind
of continuity, that legacy across time.
And at the same time, they're also every
year adding young professionals, young
researchers fresh off their PhD with new
perspectives, new innovative techniques,
new ways of looking at the data, new
ways of looking at AI. And I think that
really special balance between
experience, continuity, depth of
knowledge built over decades with new
voices, new perspectives, new ways of
solving hard computational and hard data
problems. That's what's pretty special
about the culture they built as well.
>> So you guys sit very much at at at an
intersection between quantitative and
fundamental uh data, between
quantitative and fundamental investors.
when you're thinking about systematic
signals, um, how do you manage when what
comes out of out of the data conflicts
with the fundamental narrative that
seems to be driving most of the
conversations? Who who how do you
contextualize that? Who who wins that
debate?
>> So, I think it's a great question. I'd
say a few observations. I mean one you
know Black Rockck we believe in in
individual PMs and teams that are
empowered to make you know judgments
that they are accountable for and so it
may be that our systematic investors are
coming to a different view on markets on
a range of stocks than our fundamental
teams are. That's okay. uh you know we
believe in empowered like I said
portfolio managers who are making the
best decisions they can for our clients
but are armed with a common set of tools
to to come to judgments but I think to
to abstract away from that further I'd
say you know I really do think that in
some pretty important ways what
systematic investors do is just a
different kind of thing altogether from
what fundamental investors do I think
about the work that our fundamental
investors do It's, you know, really
harnessing all potential sources of
insight to go as deep as humanly
possible um as technologically possible
with respect to understanding an
individual company and individual asset
and its likelihood of outperforming or
underperforming the market in the years
ahead. That's different than the type of
I think insight that our systematic
investors tend to kind of think about.
um they think about sort of what they
call high breath insights. So insights
that um you know basically applied to a
wide range of stocks 300 400 500 stocks.
You know we found an insight that we
think on balance over time across a
universe of many hundreds of stocks is
going to outperform. That's not about
deep research in one company and coming
to a highly convicted view on one
company. that's coming to a view about
what is statistically likely to be the
case across a full universe of stocks on
balance across time. Now, where do I
think these things can be
complimementaryary to one another? You
know, one I would say is, you know,
these are just kind of pretty different
sources of insight and again we've
talked about diversification. you know,
putting yourself in a place to put
different types of insights into a
single portfolio can be additive, can be
diversifying, can mean that the alpha
that you're generating is more
diversified and resilient. I'd say
another thing and this is something
we're spending a lot of time on with our
fundamental teams by just by virtue of
what systematic investors do insights
that apply across many hundreds of
stocks packaging as you talked about
many hundreds if not a thousand you know
types of signals into one portfolio.
They think a lot about portfolio
construction. They think a lot about how
do I take those different insights and
size them versus one another to come up
with a portfolio that is optimized to
achieve client results. You know, I
think that taking some of those lessons
of portfolio construction into the
fundamental realm with a set of
investors that at the end of the day I
think on balance view themselves as
having conviction about companies more
than portfolios and having them kind of
take some of those portfolio
optimization frames of mind and apply it
to how they build portfolios on the
fundamental side. there I think is also
a real source of complimentarity and
something we're spending a lot of time
on in PMG
>> and the Black Rockck Investment
Institute also sits under your umbrella
think tell us about what sort of uh
research they produce who consumes the
output of this is it internal is it
external is it both give us give us a
little color on the Black Rockck
Investment Institute
>> yeah I mean it's a really powerful tool
uh at at BlackRock I mean I think one So
maybe to take a step back as I've been
doing a couple times in this
conversation, you know, I think one of
our observations about the asset
management industry, the hedge fund
industry over the last 10 or 15 years is
that 10 or 15 years ago, people viewed
hedge fund alpha alpha more broadly
perhaps as the province of small niche
players who understood some corner of
the market deeper and better than
anybody else. I think 10 or 15 years on
I think we've come to see that alpha is
um more the province of scale. This is
the story of the rise of the multi
strategy hedge funds of the citadels and
millenniums. But we think it's also true
of the asset management industry at
large that there are a lot of benefits
of scale that come from you know insight
that come from risk management that come
from trading and liquidity that come
from operational backbone and you know a
big piece of that is something like the
Black Rockck Investment Institute that's
able to you know really dedicate itself
to the question of how do we uh research
and source valuable insight across a
full platform and deliver that to our
portfolio managers. And so the purpose
of the Black Rockck Investment Institute
is is one to inform those alpha uh
research discussions to really inform
and drive the investment debate within
the firm, but then also to you know open
up the curtain and let our clients see
and consume a lot of the research that
our portfolio managers are using day in
and day out to inform their own
thinking, their own uh investment
decision-making. So to answer your
question, it's a little both end. It's
about driving the investment debate,
driving the alpha discussion within the
firm, but then saying we've benefited
from this, we want our clients to
benefit from it too, and let's uh
produce work that based on what we use
internally allows our clients to to to
enjoy the fruits of that research as
well.
>> Really really interesting. So, so we are
living through an era especially under
this administration of seemingly uh
challenging geopolitical turmoil and
unexpected policy shifts. Um I want to
start with something positive which was
a quote from you.
US resilience is underestimated. So so
tell us what that means. What what does
the market mispric about the US economy
or the US markets? And we're recording
this in the first week in April. You
know, despite everything that's
happened, tariffs and war in Iran,
markets are barely 5% off their their
recent highs.
Tell us a little bit about US
resilience.
>> Sure. Well, you know, first I would say,
yeah, we're we're
>> taping this on Tuesday, midday,
>> 8:00 tonight. Who knows what'll happen?
And for all we know, that's a
misdirection and it's going to start as
soon as it gets dark. Who who knows?
>> We will we will all find out together.
Um,
>> but I but I do think that this point
about US resilience is an important one.
you know, we've seen it on display in in
at many moments over the past number of
years, including the last 12 months. You
know, the you know, diversity, the
breadth, the innovative potential of the
US economy, the quality of our corporate
sector, you know, these are all things
that are are pretty extraordinary. I
think one of the things that I would
highlight in the here and now uh with
respect to you know what I think is
fairly described as a historic energy
shock uh a energy shock the dimensions
of which I think are going to only
become even more clear uh in the weeks
and months ahead and we're seeing
physical supply disruptions in a way
that for example we didn't you know see
in 2022 post Russia's invasion and this
is a global shock this is a global
supply chain shock it is going to have
impacts on the United States. But I do
think it's fair to say that in a real
economic sense, the US is relatively
more insulated from this shock than
other economies around the world.
Whether that's in Europe, whether that's
in East and Southeast Asia, whether
that's in the emerging markets uh
broadly, you know, and and and you know,
you can look at, you know, one number
which which, you know, I spend a fair
amount of time looking at and marveling
at in some respects, which is, you know,
the price of natural gas in the US. And
if you look at a chart of the last three
four months of the natural grass
contract in the US, it basically hasn't
budged. You would be hardressed to
identify where on that chart the um
military intervention in in Iran began.
And I think that highlights, you know,
the extent to which this critical input
to electricity production in the United
States, this critical input to
industrial production in the United
States, this critical input to the way
houses kind of heat themselves and cook.
you know, all of this is, you know,
basically untouched by what we've seen
uh in the war over the last five weeks.
Again, I think that's in some ways the
most dramatic uh data point, but it
highlights the extent to which even in
the face of this global shock, there are
very important dimensions of the US that
look different than other economies
around the world and makes us on balance
more resilient than than those other
economies. Uh that gas tends to be moved
around by pipeline and it's more local.
>> Yeah. Unlike oil, it is not a globally
integrated market.
>> And and right before you stepped in
here, I I checked the price of crude was
113. Uh so by the time this comes out,
it's either much higher or much lower or
or maybe the same. But but you mentioned
supply. Let's delve into that. You know,
we saw a giant supply chain shock during
the pandemic. uh the war with Iran and
the straight of form is creating a new
energy supply shock. This seems to be an
ongoing issue. You would have thought by
now we would have solved this problem,
but it continues to be significant to
the global economy. Te tell us your
views on this.
>> Yeah, I mean you asked about the role
that the Black Rockck Investment
Institute plays. I mean, I think one of
the things that they have done and built
on over the last four years, you know,
is a piece of work they did back in 2022
called a world shaped by supply, uh,
which basically talked about the ways in
which, you know, in the 2010s in
particular, um, you know, it was a world
defined by aggate demand. I mean, this
goes back to the very start of our
conversation when we talked about the
struggles that the US and global economy
had after the GFC because perhaps of the
lack of a forceful fiscal policy lever
being pulled. That's a story about
aggate demand. That's a story about
there being insufficient demand in the
macroeconomy to achieve full employment
and inflation at target. The story
postcoid is not that. It's a world as
they've said, you know, shaped by
supply. And you know, I think that
wasn't true. That was true not just in
2021, 2022 after COVID, after Russia's
invasion. You know, it's it's true today
as well. And I would sort of draw
attention to, you know, really two
episodes that we've seen already in 2026
that highlight this point. One, and most
obviously, you know, is what we've seen
in markets since the beginning of the
military intervention in Iran and the
world pricing to a greater or lesser
extent. you know, a pretty traditional
negative energy supply shock. Higher
inflation expectations, lower growth
expectations, a pullback and risk really
across uh different types of asset
classes. But if you roll the clock back
just a couple of weeks before the
beginning of of uh hostilities in Iran,
you know, you saw a market priced for a
different type of supply shock, a
positive technology supply shock from
AI. We saw that disinflationary even
deflationary trend in the way government
bonds were getting priced. Uh we saw big
cross-sectional moves in the equity
market reflecting the potential
disruption uh from AI around a range of
business models. And so really 2026 I
think highlights both on the positive
side and on the negative side from the
in terms of supply shocks what it means
to be living in a world shaped by
supply. So abundance on the one hand,
scarcity on the other, and logistical
interruptions determining which way we
go.
>> Yeah. And the thing I need to to put on
my sort of policy observer hat at a
minimum,
you know, these however hard financial
problems are to solve and they are hard
to solve as the GFC is the Eurozone
crisis made clear, they are
fundamentally not engineering problems.
They are problems of political and
policy. will supply chain problems those
are a different beast entirely. This is
about rewiring the way physical things
atoms get produced get transported get
consumed and that is a much harder much
slower much more difficult economic and
market problem much different and harder
policy problem. I think again I would
highlight this is one of the ways in
which I think the US has proven itself
more resilient again the kind of quality
the innovative capacity the flexibility
of the US corporate sector to solve
through the supply chain problems that
we've seen since the advent of co that's
a genuine source of of resilience for
our economy but also I think highlights
that these are hard problems and a
different set of problems in kind than
what we saw post the GFC
>> so so let me have you put on your policy
wonk cap and and look out three years,
five years, what is the result of this
war going to mean for things like
alternative energy supplies? It turns
out China is fairly insulated for
different reasons than the United
States. We have fracking and that gas.
They seem to have a ton of solar and
wind um and geothermal which we've sort
of neglected the past couple of years.
Uh what's the end result of this war
going to be? I don't mean in terms of
military or political alignment. I mean
in terms of global economy,
in terms of global economy, energy
consumption, things like that.
you know, well, I'd say, you know, you
talk about three or five years out. Um,
you know, to to sort of quote the
potentially apocryphal um uh story about
Joe and Lie, I think it's too soon to
tell. We're going to find out again
together in the in in the years, maybe
even the hours and days ahead. But I
will say, I think we're spending a fair
amount of time trying to think about
some of these questions in BlackRock.
What are the more durable economic
themes going to be coming out of the
shock? I mean, I guess I might, you
know, highlight three. Um, you know,
one, you know, I think energy security,
which I think postcoid, postRussia's
invasion was already front of mind for
countries, companies, economies around
the world is only going to become more
so. uh this is I think one of the
important um trends of our moment.
Secondly, you know, I think what we're
going to see both from countries and
from companies is increased focus on
strategic stockpiling. You know,
obviously we're seeing economies make
use of things like strategic petroleum
reserves. I suspect that um in spaces
like energy, but much more broadly
across a much wider set of critical
inputs of raw materials, you're going to
see companies and countries really turn
to using resources to build stockpiles
of those of those critical inputs. Uh
and that is again, we've talked for a
long time about the ways in which
there's been a turn in the world from
just in time supply chains to resilient
supply chains. That type of stockpiling
behavior is what it means in important
ways to be spending more resources than
you otherwise would today for an
efficient outcome today in service of
greater resilience over the long term.
And then I think the third is you know I
do think that uh countries and companies
around the world are going to be looking
uh at their energy mix and I and I think
you know to the one of the points we
made about investing diversification is
a really important uh precept in
investing. uh it is perhaps the only
free lunch that's out there and I would
expect a lot of different players to be
thinking as they think about their
energy securities as they think about
how to build strategic stock piles
what's the right diversification to
ensure that I'm not subject to choke
points to supply shortages to
disruptions looking ahead I like the
concept of the framework of this shift
that's taken place in the 2020s in a lot
of ways where where the regime today is
so much different than the 2010s. Uh
more fiscal stimulus, higher rates that
seem to be structural and and built in,
higher inflation rates, more uh
geopolitical actions, more volatility.
Does this decade require us to fund
fundamentally rethink how we build
portfolios, how we manage risk? What how
different are the 2020s from the 2010s?
Yeah, I mean I think this gets to some
of the themes we were talking about
earlier that um you know diversification
is an extraordinarily important tool as
an investor and diversification is
harder to come by today than it was in
the 2010s and than has been
historically. You know, again, that's
true around the role that government
bonds can be relied upon to play in
portfolios like uh in months uh uh such
as March 2026, like in in 2022. Uh it's
also true, as we were talking about in
terms of equity markets and how
concentrated equity markets, especially
in the United States, uh have become.
And so, you know, building portfolios
means building portfolios that achieve
diversification in a world where
diversification is less available than
it has been uh in the past through
straightforward means like balance 60/40
portfolios. What does that mean? You
know, uh my boss Larry Frink has talked
about the role that private assets can
play in building more resilient, more
diversified portfolios. you know, I
think is part of of of that talking
about the role that hedge funds and
liquid alternative strategies can play
in public markets as we've done here.
That role that uncorrelated alpha uh
alpha that's not uh exposed to broad
market directionality can play in
portfolios. These are the types of of
solutions that I think investors of all
types are going to need to reach for to
build those portfolios that are designed
for a world shaped by supply, designed
for a world of geopolitical shocks,
designed for a world where
diversification is is harder to come by.
And the answer isn't as straightforward
as the traditional 6040. Um the world is
going to have to be thought of in terms
of that broader set of tools.
>> So we've spent a lot of time talking
about the Middle East. Let let's look
around the rest of the world. Uh
starting with this attempt to sort of
decouple from China. Is is that
achievable or are these just political
aspirations that don't reflect economic
reality?
>> So I think that's a very good question.
Um I I will say you know it is clear uh
that President Trump and the
administration have been working to uh
achieve a stable economic footing uh
between the US and China. uh I think
that that uh if it were to be achieved
would be positive again from the
perspective of the type of stability,
the type of predictability that allows
businesses, households, individuals to
to plan and and and make choices. Um I
think that plays into um you know you
know one of the things that we've been
talking about what I've been talking
about last week even um with some of
your colleagues is you know the summit
between President Trump President Trump
and President Xi is scheduled for May
14th and May 15th. You know, I think
that as we look about events in the
Middle East, that's a date that I have
in my own um eye. Uh as I think about
when uh hostilities in the Middle East
uh would likely need to be winding down,
I think hardressed to see how a summit
happens. They've already reschedled
once. How hard to see how summit happens
in the event of ongoing active
hostilities in the Middle East. And I I
I do wonder hard whether that's a backs
stop around the Middle East because I do
think that there's a strong priority
from this president I think from the
Chinese side as well to find that
stability between the US and China and I
think the summit is meant to be uh the
culmination of of a lot of that work.
>> So have to talk about AI a little bit.
um what's the potential there for uh
possible supply shock and impact on the
labor markets, the ability to accelerate
uh productivity and and corporate
earnings growth. H how does Black Rockck
think about what AI is really doing
across everything?
>> Sure. I mean, I would say the um
the uncertainty bands here are
extraordinarily high. Uh and so I think
in some ways it's hard to venture a
forecast around what this means for
productivity, what this means for the
labor market, what this means for
geopolitics one year from now, much less
five, eight, 10 years from now. You
know, I think what I might helpfully do
is is zero in a little bit um within a
within a domain that that I know better,
namely namely Black Rockck. And I think
about kind of what are we doing? And I I
I'd make maybe a couple of observations.
I mean, one, we've already talked about
the work ongoing in the systematic
platform and and really, you know, they
continue day in and day out to define
that frontier of what technology, what
AI means in terms of how to to manage uh
portfolios and generate investment
insight. You know, I look across our
active investment platform more broadly.
Uh we are very busily deploying tools
that empower individual researchers to
access more of the collective
intelligence of BlackRock to go deeper
to go broader more rapidly around
researching individual securities
researching individual companies
researching macroeconomic trends and
come to more judgments better judgments
more rapidly in ways that we think can
can help drive investment performance.
Third, I think one of the ways in which,
you know, Black Rockck continues to to
seek to provide solutions that that make
sense for our clients is to do what we
call customization at scale. Uh to be
able to look at an individual investor,
listen to their concerns, listen to
their needs, and design a solution
that's customized for, you know, their
particular circumstances. again whether
that's an institution or an individual
technology AI you know is opening up the
prospect of being able to do that with
more granularity at greater speed and
allow us to to get in front of our
clients with solutions that are really
oriented to their goals their dreams
their ambitions their concerns in a way
that's that's different than than
before. Last point I'd make is one of
the cool things about being at BlackRock
is you know it's a big place filled with
a lot of smart people and a lot of the
excitement is just giving tools uh to
our researchers to our professionals and
seeing organically you know what they
come up with uh and I think a lot of the
excitement of the moment is seeing so
much innovation seeing so much
experimentation seeing so many cool
applications of this technology and our
data to to solve problems s for clients.
You know, now we're at the stage where
where we're kind of saying as a firm,
okay, what are the handful of things
that have bubbled up organically that we
think can really move the needle for our
clients, really move the needle for the
firm and think about what it means to
put our shoulder behind those as an
organization.
>> So, last question before I get to my
favorites I ask all our guests. Given
all this geopolitical turmoil and market
volatility and uncertainty, what do you
think investors are not thinking about
or talking about but perhaps should be?
What what topics? Assets, geography,
policy, data point, what's getting
overlooked but shouldn't.
>> So there I mean I'll I'll offer an
answer that kind of puts on you know
both of my hats. Um and say we've
obviously been talking about AI. We were
just talking about it as applied to to
Black Rockck. You know, I think that the
investment implications of AI, as I
said, have huge kind of uncertainty
bands around them. Uh where value is
going to occur, at what pace, what
transformations to the macroeconomy, to
the labor market, to geopolitics, these
are all extraordinarily first order
questions for investors. You know, I'd
say one piece that I think is being
underappreciated
uh is the degree to which, you know, I
think AI is going to become a first
order political and policy issue in the
quarters, couple of years ahead. We're
seeing the beginnings of that. You know,
talk about, you know, data center
moratoriums, talk about um you know, uh
things like uh you know, chip access for
China, something I worked on. But but I
think if you talk to, you know,
pollsters, they would say AI is
rocketing up the list of issues that
voters are focused on in the United
States more broadly. And I think an
important dimension of what it's going
to mean to invest in AI is understanding
that this is going to become a a
risingly important political and policy
issue and an additional dimension of
uncertainty that investors are going to
have to confront as we make choices
around where impact is going to be felt
and value is going to acrew.
>> Really interesting answer. All right,
let's jump to my favorite questions I
ask all of my guests. Starting with and
I really have to split this question
into two. Who were the mentors who
helped shape your career both from an
investing standpoint as well as a
government and policy perspective?
>> Yeah. So, so um I'd offer a couple of
thoughts here. Um you know uh pair of
Peters in my life guy named Peter
Fischer uh who um was responsible for
bringing me into BlackRock uh as an
investor. You know, to me, he had been a
senior official in George W. Bush's
Treasury Department, a legendary Federal
Reserve official, had led the fixed
income platform at BlackRock, had really
that type of career, bringing together
public and private, uh, and is the
person kind of most responsible for
bringing me into Black Rockck, and
somebody who's been an important
counselor to me through the years. you
know, spent some time yesterday with my
very first economic policy boss in
Washington, Peter Orzag. Uh was part of
President Obama's uh cabinet as the
director of the White House budget
office, now the CEO of Lazard.
Similarly, somebody to me who's brought
together public service with uh
financial and uh commercial uh uh
service uh as well. Uh and somebody
who's again been an important source of
council advice. But I would say beyond
that, I mean, you know, my mentors both
in government and BlackRock, you know,
I'd really look into those organizations
at large. You know, when I was in
government, the career civil servants at
the Office of Management Budget, the
career civil servants at the Treasury
Department, they knew more about their
corner of the federal government, their
corner of the world than anybody else in
the world. And if you just sat down and
listened, they had so much to share and
offer. Similarly, at Black Rockck, my
attitude when I walked in as a kind of
new investor in my mid-30s, having never
been in financial markets before, was
I've got as much to learn from the
analyst's associates as I do from those
Peters, as I do from the senior
leadership of the firm. And being open
to this idea that there is knowledge to
be gleaned all in all places in these
organizations is I think how I think
about how I've been mentored by these
places as much as individual people.
>> Let's talk about books. What are what
are some of your favorites? What are you
reading currently?
>> So, I've been revisiting a favorite of
mine um um uh called The Wise Men by
Walter Isacson. I was listening to a
podcast that Tyler Cowan did a couple
weeks ago where he talked about, you
know, AI, the geopolitical changes that
we're seeing means that, you know, the
world is going to have to be reinvented
a new, not unlike perhaps was the case
after the Second World War. That's a
book about uh you know the group of
Americans that really constructed uh the
post-war world, constructed the security
architecture, constructed a world built
on uh American leadership and integrated
global markets and helped to build that
you know 80 years of of of peace of
prosperity uh that we as Americans and
have have enjoyed. And I think that
revisiting that uh is uh a reminder of
what it takes to rebuild a world, what
it takes to invent a world a new. And I
do think that Tyler's right that this is
a moment that because of technological
transformation, because of changes in
the world at large is going to require
that type of thinking again. And and so
revisiting that book and and revisiting
some of its lessons is is something
that's been important to me in the past
couple of weeks.
>> You you mentioned Tyler Cowan's podcast.
What else is uh you you're streaming
these days? Other podcasts or Netflix or
Amazon type stuff?
>> Yeah. So, I I would put in a um pitch
for my friends um Jake Sullivan and John
Feiner, their new podcast called The
Long Game um about uh US national
security and and foreign policy. I'd say
I like it for three reasons. I mean,
one, uh, you know, I think they really
try to offer a pretty just the facts
perspective on the choices confronting
policy makers, um, here in the United
States and and more broadly, too. It's a
real window into the craft of foreign
policy. I mean, I think there's a lot to
be learned from the craft of how
professionals, whether they're policy
makers or investors or business leaders,
kind of think about doing what they do,
and this is a window in that. And third
is a personal one. You know, I spent two
years of my life spent many years on top
of that being in dialogue with both of
those guys. And for me, once a week to
kind of tune in for an hour and hear two
familiar voices talking about stuff that
I care about is a is a pretty comforting
thing to get to do as well.
>> So, our final two questions, what sort
of advice would you give to a recent
college graduate interested in a career
in either investing or government
policy?
>> Yeah. So I'd say you know a mix of the
timeless and the timely. You know I
think on the timely side you know it is
clearly the case that
working to be at the frontier of how the
tools of technology, the tools of AI are
getting used to expand and augment the
productivity of workers in in finance
and government is is kind of table
stakes. But I'd also emphasize the time
less um you know in investing
it is still going to be the case that
the net amount of alpha in the market um
net of fees is you know zero or gross of
ease is zero. Uh it is still going to be
the case that the fundamental law of
active management that that mix of
forecasting skill breath and the ability
to translate in the portfolio is what's
going to define active management. you
know being steeped in those timeless
truths I think is valuable. Last point
I'd make is you know you can never
emphasize enough what is always going to
be human. You know trust is hard to
build that is built on the back of
relationships and relationships across
time. You know spending time building
your relationships building trust being
seen as somebody who acts with trust and
integrity. You know it's not just a way
to live a good life. uh it is also um a
pretty good piece of I think career
advice as well.
>> I I I like that advice. And our final
question, what do you know about the
world of investing today? Might have
been useful to know 30 years or so ago.
Yeah, I mean, you know, I would say, you
know, we've talked a lot about
diversification and portfolio
construction across this conversation.
And that to me, I think, is the piece
that I've most
um climbed up a curve around that I've
been kind of most struck by learning
about during my time at Black Rockck,
across the stint in the PR one. What I
expected to learn when I left government
the first time was, okay, how do I do
deep macroeconomic research? What I
expected when I left government the
first time around is how do I take deep
macroeconomic research and turn that
into an insight that I can um put on as
an individual position or individual
trade. What I hadn't appreciated and
came to really um love learning about
was okay, how do you actually take five
or six or seven of those insights, put
them in a portfolio, understand how much
return each can generate, understand how
they're correlated, how they move with
one another, and then you know build a
portfolio of those insights that is
going to deliver the right risk, the
right return for clients. And that's the
art and science of portfolio
construction, which to me is at the end
of the day the art and science of what
it means to be a good investor and to
serve your clients well.
>> Well, this has been absolutely
fascinating. Thank you, Mike, for being
so generous with your time. We have been
speaking with Mike Pile, deputy head of
Black Rockck's portfolio management
group, helping to oversee about $5
trillion in client assets. If you enjoy
this conversation, well, be sure and
check out any of the 600 we've done over
the past 12 years. You can find those at
iTunes, Spotify, Bloomberg, YouTube,
wherever you get your favorite podcast.
I would be remiss if I didn't thank the
crack team that helps put these
conversations together.
Alexis Noriega is my video producer.
Sean Russo is my researcher. Anna Luke
is my producer. I'm Barry Britz. You've
been listening to Masters in Business on
Bloomberg Radio.